Network Safety Checker – Usage Guide

This file explains how to use the Network Safety Checker script on Linux and how users on Windows and macOS can still run it by using a Linux environment. It also includes basic setup instructions for a fresh Linux system and a short guide on how to upload the project to GitHub from Linux.

1. Using the script on Linux

The script is designed for Linux systems, especially Debian-based distributions such as Ubuntu and Kali. To use it:

a) Save the script file as "network_safety_checker.sh" in a folder of your choice.

b) Open a terminal and change into that folder. For example:
   cd ~/projects/network-safety-checker

c) Make the script executable:
   chmod +x network_safety_checker.sh

d) Run the script as root. You can use sudo:
   sudo ./network_safety_checker.sh

You should see colored output showing the firewall status, open ports, SSH configuration, user password checks, world-writable files, and update information, followed by a final security score out of ten.

If you get errors that commands such as ufw, ss, or apt are missing, it may be because your distribution uses different tools or is not Debian-based. The script is written for a typical Ubuntu or Kali environment.

2. Using the script from Windows

The script itself is a Bash script and expects a Linux-like environment. Windows users can still run it by using one of these options:

Option 1: Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL)

a) Enable WSL and install a Linux distribution such as Ubuntu from the Microsoft Store.

b) Open the WSL terminal (for example, Ubuntu).

c) Inside WSL, install git if it is not installed:
   sudo apt update
   sudo apt install git

d) Clone the repository or copy the script file into your WSL home directory.

e) Make the script executable and run it as described in the Linux section:
   chmod +x network_safety_checker.sh
   sudo ./network_safety_checker.sh

Option 2: Linux virtual machine

a) Install a virtualization tool such as VirtualBox or VMware Player on Windows.

b) Download a Linux ISO such as Ubuntu or Kali and create a virtual machine.

c) Boot the virtual machine and log in to Linux.

d) Inside the virtual machine, copy or clone the script and run it as on a normal Linux system.

3. Using the script from macOS

macOS is Unix-based but does not use all the same tools or configuration paths as a typical Linux distribution. The simplest way to use this project on macOS is to run a Linux environment inside a virtual machine or a container.

Option 1: Linux virtual machine

a) Install a virtualization tool such as VirtualBox, VMware Fusion, or similar.

b) Download an Ubuntu or Kali ISO and create a Linux virtual machine.

c) Boot into the Linux virtual machine.

d) Copy or clone the project into the Linux system.

e) Make the script executable and run it with sudo, as in the Linux section.

Option 2: Container based environment

If you have a container runtime such as Docker installed on macOS, you can create a small container image based on a Debian or Ubuntu image, copy the script into it, and run it inside the container. This requires more setup but keeps the Linux environment separated from the host system.

4. Setting up a fresh Linux system and uploading to GitHub

If you are using a fresh Linux system (for example, booted from a live USB), you can follow these basic steps to set up the project and push it to GitHub so that your work is not lost.

a) Install git (on Ubuntu or Kali):
   sudo apt update
   sudo apt install git

b) Configure your git user name and email. Replace the example values with your own:
   git config --global user.name "Your Name"
   git config --global user.email "your-email@example.com"

c) Create a project folder and move into it:
   mkdir -p ~/projects/network-safety-checker
   cd ~/projects/network-safety-checker

d) Create the files network_safety_checker.sh, README.md, code_explanation.txt, and usage_guide.txt using a text editor such as nano. For example:
   nano network_safety_checker.sh

   Paste the script content, save, and exit.

e) Make the script executable:
   chmod +x network_safety_checker.sh

f) Initialize a new git repository inside the folder:
   git init

g) Add all files to git:
   git add .

h) Commit the files with a message:
   git commit -m "Initial version of Network Safety Checker project"

i) On the GitHub website, create a new empty repository, for example named "network-safety-checker". Do not add any files from the GitHub side.

j) GitHub will show you a URL for your repository. It will look like:
   https://github.com/your-username/network-safety-checker.git

k) Connect your local repository to GitHub:
   git remote add origin https://github.com/your-username/network-safety-checker.git

l) Push your local code to GitHub:
   git branch -M main
   git push -u origin main

After this, your project is stored on GitHub. The next time you boot your Linux USB, you can simply clone it back with:
   git clone https://github.com/your-username/network-safety-checker.git

This way, even if your live USB does not remember files between reboots, your work stays safe in your GitHub repository.
